# Lab 0


This lab is a "warm-up" lab to make sure everyone's infrastructure is working and to get the easy part out of the way.  

## Summary:
Write, in C or C++, a program that sorts a text file of unique integers and outputs the sorted list, and write-up a description of the project. In effect, you are emulating the performance of the UNIX `sort -n` command.  This lab is an individual assignment.

## Code Requirements / Restrictions
You must implement both of the following sorting algorithms:
* Quicksort
* Mergesort

You are allowed to use pre-written unsorted data structures (e.g. STL's vector), but you may not use any pre-written sorted data structure or sorting algorithm (e.g. STL's map).

### Lab write-up:
Your lab write-up, called `WRITEUP.md` should include:
* A brief description of your code organization
* A description of every file submitted
* Any extant bugs

I expect your lab write-up for this project will be around a page or two.

### Code style:
Your code should be readable and commented so that the grader can understand what's going on.

### Submission:
You should submit a link to your final commit to the canvas assignment, following the instructions on the class website.  This mechanism allows us to be sure of exactly what commit you intend to be graded, and when you completed it.  Do not forget this step!

### Compilation and Execution:
Your submitted zip file should contain a Makefile and the project should build using a single `make` command.  The generated executable should be called `mysort`.  The `mysort` command should have the following syntax:

`mysort [--name] [sourcefile.txt] [-o outfile.txt] [--alg=<merge,quick>]`

Using the `--name` option should print your name.  Otherwise, the program should sort the source file using the algorithm selected in the `alg` argument.  The source file is a text file with a single integer on each line.  The `mysort` command should then sort all integers in the source file and print them sorted one integer per line (as would be done by the `sort -n` command) to an output file (specified by the `-o` option).  

See below for `mysort` syntax examples.  The `getopt` and `getopt_long` method calls are helpful for parsing the command line. You can assume that all input values are non-negative, less than or equal to `INT_MAX`, and that there are no duplicates.

### Testing:
We include a `autograde.sh` script and seven test cases, located in `autograde_tests` for you to test your code.  Your submission will be autograded every time you push using the autograder.  To run the autograder on the provided tests, use:

`./autograde.sh`

You can add additional test cases in an additional directory.  You can generate test input files using the UNIX `shuf` (shuffle) command (see below for examples using a bash shell).  Using this input file you can compare your results with `sort` using the `cmp` command, which checks if files are equivalent.  The autograder expects that input files have a `.txt` extension, and the answer files have a `.ans` extension. To run the autograder on your own directory, use:

`./autograde.sh ./my_own_test_directory`

I _highly_ recommend you test your code using this methodology... it's how we'll grade you!



## Grading:
Your assignment will be graded as follows:
* *Unit tests (70%):*
We will check your code using fourteen randomly generated input files (generated by `shuf` and checked by `cmp`).  Correctly sorting a file on both algorithms is worth five points.  Half of these test cases are in the `autograde_tests` directory.
* *Lab write-up, code readability, and coding interview (30%):* 
Lab write-ups and readable code that meet the requirements will get full marks. Incomplete write-ups or unreadable code will be docked points.

Recall that late submissions will be penalized 5% for every day late, and will not be accepted after the final day of class.

## Examples

Examples of your `mysort` program's syntax
```
### print your name
./mysort --name
# prints:
Your Full Name

### Consider an unsorted file
printf "3\n2\n1\n" > 321.txt
cat 321.txt
# prints
3
2
1

### Sort the text file and print to file
# where the .my extension indicates it's
# your solution
./mysort 321.txt -o 321.my --alg=quick
cat 321.my
# prints:
1
2
3
```

Several useful shell commands for this assignment:
```
### To generate a random test file ###
# -i1-10 is the range (1 to 10)
# -n5 is the length (chose 5 numbers from the range)
# testcase.txt is the output shuffled file
shuf -i1-10 -n5 > testcase.txt

### To sort a text file with linux ###
# -n is cast each line to integers
# testcase.txt is the shuffled file
# testcase.ans is the sorted file
sort -n testcase.txt > testcase.ans

### To compare two text files ###
# e.g. to verify your program's correctness
# Note that line endings matter!
cmp --silent testcase.my testcase.ans && echo "Same!" || echo "Different!"
```


How we will grade your code:
```
### Generate a test file
### (of unspecified range and size)
shuf -i0-2147483643 -n382 > case1.txt

### Sort it using sort
sort -n case1.txt > case1.ans

### Run your mysort program to also sort the test file
./mysort case1.txt -o case1.my --alg=merge

### Compare test results
cmp --silent case1.my case1.ans && echo "Pass (5pts)" || echo "Fail (0pts)"

### You can see this logic in the ./autograde.sh script!
```
